Proposal for Schema Improvements (#85)
OpenTermsArchive/terms-types: decision-records/0001-schema-improvements.md

## Context and Problem Statement

### Confusion around the `writer` field

The `writer` field is filled in with `service provider` in 32 out of 41 existing terms types, which does not add much value. Other values, such as `transportation operator (airline, railway, bus…)` (once), `paid-for goods or service provider` (once), `online marketplace` (twice), `search engine or intermediation service provider` (twice), and `intermediation service provider` (three times), only provide information about the industry in which the service operates, which is not the original purpose of the `writer` field.

### Ambiguity in the `audience` field

There is ambiguity between the audience of the document and the audience of the service. Currently, the `audience` field could be interpreted in these two ways.

## Proposed solutions

### Solution A

#### Schema

```json
"<terms type name>": {
  "defines": "...",
  "used by": "...", // Default value: "service provider"

>   "addressed to": "...", // Default value: "end user"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "addressed to": "...", // Default value: "end user"
  "applies to": "...", // Optional
```

Author: It seems a bit redundant to me.

Reviewer: These two fields serve different purposes. However, if they still seem too similar, I would prefer using `applicability` (or `applies to`) as it feels less restrictive and allows for broader, more detailed explanations. 

For example:

```
"Imprint": {
    "topic": "identification of content author and hosting service for official inquiries",
    …,
    "applicability": "Required in some regions, such as EU countries, to ensure transparency and provide contact information"
}
```

Or:

```
"Developer Terms": {
    "topic": "APIs and programmatic access to content",
    …,
    "applicability": "Restricted to developers or partners authorized to use the service's APIs or development tools"
}
```

Reviewer 2: Decided in sync call: `applicability` sounds like a mix of jurisdiction, industry and audience. We won't apply it as such.

  "also known as": [ // Optional
    "..."
  ],
  "referenced by": { // Optional
    "name": "url"
  }
}
```

##### Examples

```json
"Editorial Policy": {
  "defines": "the writing and publishing standards and principles",
  "also known as": [
    "Editorial Guidelines"
  ],
  "referenced by": {
    "Open Terms Archive discussion": "https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/terms-types/discussions/35"
  }
}
```

```json
"Conditions of Carriage": {
  "defines": "benefits and limitations associated with the transportation being provided",
  "used by": "transportation operator (airline, railway, bus…)",

>   "addressed to": "passenger",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "addressed to": "passenger",
  "applies to": "All passengers or clients purchasing transport services, goods in transit under the carrier's responsibility, and any agreement between carrier and customer for transportation services.",
```

  "also known as": [
    "Transport Conditions"
  ]
}
```

### Solution B 

#### Schema

```json
"<terms type name>": {
  "topic": "...",
  "industry": "...", // Default value: "any"
  "recipient": "...", // Default value: "end user"

>   "aliases": [ // Optional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "applicability": // Optional
  "aliases": [ // Optional
```

Reviewer 2: Decided in sync call: `applicability` sounds like a mix of jurisdiction, industry and audience. We won't apply it as such.

    "..."
  ],
  "references": { // Optional
    "name": "url"
  }
}
```

##### Examples

```json
"Editorial Policy": {
  "topic": "writing and publishing standards and principles",
  "aliases": [
    "Editorial Guidelines"
  ],
  "references": {
    "Open Terms Archive discussion": "https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/terms-types/discussions/35"
  }
}
```

```json
"Conditions of Carriage": {
  "topic": "benefits and limitations associated with the transportation being provided",
  "industry": "transportation operator (airline, railway, bus…)",

>   "recipient": "passenger",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "recipient": "passenger",
  "applicability": "Applicable to all passengers or clients purchasing transport services, to goods in transit under the carrier's responsibility, and to any agreement between carrier and customer for transportation services."
```

# Proposal for Schema Improvements

- Date: 2024-10-22

## Introduction

> This RFC proposes improvements to the current data schema to improve usability. Since changing the data structure entails publishing a new major version—which can be costly for downstream dependencies—it is crucial to use this opportunity to reconsider the entire vocabulary and structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes improvements to the current data schema to improve usability. Since changing the data structure entails publishing a new major version, which is costly for downstream dependencies, it is relevant to consider the entire vocabulary and structure to avoid later changes in the near future.
```

## Context and Problem Statement

### Confusion around the `writer` field

> The `writer` field is filled in with "service provider" in 32 out of 41 terms types, which does not seem to add significant value. Other values, such as `transportation operator (airline, railway, bus…)` (once), `paid-for goods or service provider` (once), `online marketplace` (twice), `search engine or intermediation service provider` (twice), and `intermediation service provider` (three times), can provide information about the industry in which the terms operate, which is not the original purpose of the `writer` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `writer` field is filled in with `service provider` in 32 out of 41 existing terms types, which does not add much value. Other values, such as `transportation operator (airline, railway, bus…)` (once), `paid-for goods or service provider` (once), `online marketplace` (twice), `search engine or intermediation service provider` (twice), and `intermediation service provider` (three times), only provide information about the industry in which the service operates, which is not the original purpose of the `writer` field.
```

### Ambiguity in the `audience` field

There is ambiguity between the audience of the document and the audience of the service. Currently, the `audience` field could be interpreted in these two ways.

> ### Complex vocabulary
> 
> Several fields are named in ways that could be clearer, such as the `object` field of the `commitment`.
> 

Reviewer 2: I am not sure this is relevant nor necessary.
```suggestion
```

## Proposed solutions

### Solution A

#### Schema

```json
"<terms type name>": {
  "defines": "...",
  "used by": "...", // Default value: "service provider"
  "addressed to": "...", // Default value: "end user"
  "also known as": [ // Optional
    "..."
  ],

>   "referenced by": { // Optional

Reviewer 2: No, the terms types are not “referenced by” external references to Wikipedia or law articles 😉 :

```suggestion
  "references": { // Optional
```

…or, to keep it in line with the verbs:

```suggestion
  "described in": { // Optional
```

Author: I'm in favour of keeping the verb formulation in this solution A but I'm not entirely convinced of `described in`. I would prefer `sourced from`, which I think is more accurate (within the limits of my level of English).

Reviewer 2: `sourced from` sounds misleading to me, as we don't derive the terms type from these references but the other way around: we find terms in the wild, group them and identify their name and legal grounding, in a bottom up way rather than top down.

Author: I understand, and you're right, that in the process we first collect terms in the wild before finding their legal basis.

    "name": "url"
  }
}
```

##### Examples

```json
"Editorial Policy": {
  "defines": "the writing and publishing standards and principles",
  "also known as": [
    "Editorial Guidelines"
  ],
  "referenced by": {
    "Open Terms Archive discussion": "https://github.com/OpenTermsArchive/terms-types/discussions/35"
  }
}
```

```json
"Conditions of Carriage": {
  "defines": "benefits and limitations associated with the transportation being provided",
  "used by": "transportation operator (airline, railway, bus…)",
  "addressed to": "passenger",
  "also known as": [
    "Transport Conditions"
  ]
}
```

### Solution B 

#### Schema

```json
"<terms type name>": {

>   "subject": "...",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  "topic": "...",
```

>   "owner": "...", // Default value: "service provider"

Reviewer 2: If this is optional and defines an industry constraint, I don't find `owner` very clear.
```suggestion
  "industry": "...", // Default value: "any"
```

>   "recipient": "...", // Default value: "end user"

Reviewer 2: “recipient” implies an intention to _send_ the information to someone. I feel this is more about having a _target_, a _reader_ or an _audience_…

Reviewer: I vote for `audience`.

Reviewer: Or maybe `intended users`?

Author: I understand. From my point of view, the `audience` is too ambiguous, `target` has a less appropriate semantic field. 

`reader` seems fine to me.

Reviewer: I'm not in favor of the term `reader`. While I can read this document, being a 'reader' doesn't necessarily mean I am concerned by its content.

Reviewer: @clementbiron what about `intended users`?

Reviewer 2: Looking through the thesaurus, what about “party”? It is unfortunately ambiguous with a fun event, but it is relevant in the meaning “parties to an agreement”.
Another possibility could be “contractor”, but it is also ambiguous with some entity that procures some service.
I also discovered the word “obligor”: “a person who is bound to another by contract or other legal procedure”.

Reviewer: Among all propositions, for now I still vote for `audience`.
`party`, `contractor` or `obligor` are not very clear for me. 
Moreover, not all our terms type involve the same level of commitment. An agreement does not imply the same level of commitment as a guideline. So `contractor` and words with this kind of meaning seems to restrictive for me.

Reviewer: Otherwise, what about `stakeholders`?

Author: `intended users` is very clear but I struggle a bit with the fact that it's in two words

- Date: 2024-10-22

## Introduction

This RFC proposes improvements to the current data schema to improve usability. Since changing the data structure entails publishing a new major version, which is costly for downstream dependencies, it is relevant to consider the entire vocabulary and structure to avoid later changes in the near future.

## Context and Problem Statement

### Confusion around the `writer` field

The `writer` field is filled in with `service provider` in 32 out of 41 existing terms types, which does not add much value. Other values, such as `transportation operator (airline, railway, bus…)` (once), `paid-for goods or service provider` (once), `online marketplace` (twice), `search engine or intermediation service provider` (twice), and `intermediation service provider` (three times), only provide information about the industry in which the service operates, which is not the original purpose of the `writer` field.

### Ambiguity in the `audience` field

There is ambiguity between the audience of the document and the audience of the service. Currently, the `audience` field could be interpreted in these two ways.

## Proposed solutions

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

In any case, this file format does not have default values. Optimizations to remove redundancy do not bring much in the context, and add ambiguity instead.

```
